      == == == From - lae@mullauna.cs.mu.oz.au (Lewin EDWARDS) == == ==
   [Note : To people who saved my earlier post re: installation of the 1Mb
                   installation procedure is included here]
                  -=<* About This Document - Disclaimer *>=-
This document is intended to provide electronics hobbyists with some useful
intended to train or encourage novices to attempt service or modifications
unqualified personnel to tamper with dangerous appliances such as monitors,
high-tension rails, or other hazardous areas. Any such work carried out is
damage to property or person which occurs as a result of attempting any of
        Having said that, I can vouch for the workability of the
own machines (this is, after all, a chronicle of my own experiences, chopped
information, whilst I have described problems and the solution(s) I found,
the telephone or from an encyclopaedia. What I mean by this statement is that
example, if you turn your monitor on and nothing happens, perhaps the fuse is
is a more sinister fault in the power supply section. For this reason, I
it is very rare to find two machines which are exactly the same inside, and
totally inappropriate to your situation.
                      -=<* The Commodore Amiga 500 *>=-
i. Serial Killer
Problems with Amiga serial ports generally fall into three categories; problems
and problems with the line level (caused by faulty line driver chips). The
the CIA and Paula chips, so I advise exploring the line driver section of the
        Faults in the line driver chips (MC1488 and MC1489, U38 and U39
Commodore Amiga 500') are typified by either total loss of transmission, total
RTS), you usually see that these lines are behaving normally (exactly why
have a faulty CIA. Since the 1488 and 1489 only cost around A$1.00 each,
investigate Paula. Unfortunately, they are not socketed so you will have to
out, put in a couple of sockets to facilitate later repairs.
time to look further. If you have suitable software, you can check whether the
CIA, U8) or in the data lines (in which case you have a damaged Paula). If you
make use of an old Amiga-tech wrinkle; exchange the CIA chips and see if your
started out as U8; if the problem persists, then it is most likely a Paula

------------------
have the same make and model of internal floppy. It seems that Commodore
weekly basis. Let's see.. three possible LED colors (red, green, yellow),
Panasonic, Sony), two different styles of head connector (one film connector
belt-drive head carriage mechanisms.. that makes 144 possible configurations
of-the-large-chip" directions, and I can only state a couple of possible faults

Probably caused by a defective odd CIA (U7). Try switching the CIAs over. Also
Verify that the pads to which the switch assembly is connected have not flaked

The head alignment is faulty. There is a method of adjusting it without
and one of the X-Copy series of programs. The method is as follows :
- Open your machine (or external drive). Remove the cover from the drive unit
back). Locate the track zero sensor and loosen the screw which holds it in
- You must now align the lower head. This can be accomplished by moving the
you find a position in which the drive will read the lower side of the disk.
stop it shifting. If you have any Lok-Tite, a drop of that on the screw is
- You must now align the upper head. Loosen the two screws which hold it to
idea of going over the floor with a metal detector looking for small springs).
head. Now repeat the above trial-and-error process, tweaking the upper head
cover and reassemble.
I have successfully performed it on a number of Amiga and PC 3.5" drives. And

--------------------
Lock light will start blinking and the keyboard will lock up. This is caused
noticed this fault when our school Amiga room (two rev. 5a A500's) acquired an
this joystick would periodically jam the keyboard. If you have recently
during boot fixes the problem. Otherwise, you can try the old "Atari Twist",
equivalent to reseating the chips on the motherboard; if you have a spare

------------------------
-----------------------------
part 8372a or 318069-02, is the relatively new Agnus which is capable of
sampled music, screens, and other custom-chip data in memory simultaneously.
in 16-color 640x512 (or 640x400, NTSC users) mode, without having to
A-Max users, installing the new Agnus and configuring it to 1Mb chip-RAM mode
it will make A-Max virtually 100% identical to a Mac Plus, memory-map-wise.

the 8372a in most (nearly all Rev. 6a) A500's, without telling anybody. In
connect an A501, it will still think it is "slow" [see below] RAM.
iv-2. An Aside on Memory Speeds
The Amiga has *three* types of RAM. Chip-RAM, Fast-RAM and "Slow"-RAM.
the A501 expander, and the second 512K of RAM in A2000's) is NOT fast-RAM,
accessed via Agnus, it is affected by buss contention in just the same way as
chips and which is not faster than chip-RAM. Moving this RAM to $80000 (which
all.
iv-3. Compatibility
To date (20-Oct-91, 18:11EST) I have personally tested at least 400 pieces of
* Double Dragon II (Completely screwed up)
* Impossible Mission II (This game requires memory at $C00000. It does not
512K chip/512K slow mode. Lousy AllocAbs() programmer !)
not play in-game music. Again, this can be rectified by switching into 512K
machine, notably TechnoCop and R-Type, but this is of no real consequence.
iv-4. Identifying the Version of your A500
There are several versions of the A500 out there. I have only tried fitting
 a. The Revision 5 board shipped until early 1989
The way to identify your machine type is to check the expansion port which
machine has a very fat strip (double width) at the back of the connector; the

-----------------------------------------------
to use the PAL mode, go to step 3.
NTSC modes. When it is tied low (to ground), the machine boots in NTSC mode.
PAL mode. On the Rev. 5 board, pin 41 is connected to ground by tracks on BOTH
desoldering the socket. This means if you just plug in the new Agnus, you will
this problem; I will detail here the one I undertook on my own Rev. 5 board. I
If you only want to run in PAL mode, you can simply bend out pin 41 of the
contact with Agnus. If you do this, proceed to step 3. Otherwise, get yourself
stiff single-core wire). Solder wires to the switch :
                            +---+
                   +--------+-o |  When held as shown, UP=PAL, DOWN=NTSC.
                   |        +---+
                 \-/ <-- Fold the wire thru 180 degrees
3. Insert the new Agnus. If installing the switch, you should now poke the
that the bare copper side touches the pin on the chip and the insulated side
find it necessary to bend out or remove entirely [Not recommended !] the pin

locate JP2 (between 68000 and ROM). This consists of three pads. The center
solder between the center and upper pads. Now locate the _EXRAM line coming
motherboard parallel to the A501 connector). Cut this line. You have now

pads. Locate the _EXRAM line from the A501 port (see step 4) and cut the
the gap you cut in the _EXRAM track. Wire a DPDT switch as follows :
                   +-----+  BACK VIEW OF SWITCH
Center pad of JP2 -+-o o-+- To one side of the gap in the _EXRAM track
                   +-----+

------------------------------------------------
not wish to use the PAL mode should go to step 3. When installing the new
anti-clockwise from the orientation on the revision 5 board. For this reason,
2. JP4 controls PAL/NTSC video mode. If you are in North America or Hong Kong
used, this should be bridged by a track or a blob of solder. If you are in
used, this jumper should be cut open. If you wish to install a switch, then
3. Cut the track joining the center and upper pads of JP2, and the track
and JP7a is just to the left of the A501 connector). If you wish to install a
JP2 together. You have now completed the installation procedure.

Upper pad of JP2 --+-o o |  When held as shown, UP=512K CHIP, DOWN=1M CHIP
Lower pad of JP2 --+-o o-+-- Upper pad of JP7a
You have now completed the installation procedure.
v.  Is My Jumper On The Line ?
Number  Rev5 ?  Rev6a ? Function
JP1     yes     yes     Connects reset timer (NE555) to main reset
JP3     yes     yes     Swaps _CAS of RAM banks (of use for test purposes)
                        8372a Agnus : PAL/NTSC video mode select
JP6     no      yes     7MHz clock on pin 7 of expansion connector
JP7b    no      yes     CIA tick from VSYNC or pin 32 of A501 (default VSYNC)
JP9     no      no      ??? A non-existent jumper. Future Rev. 7 ???
JP10b   no      yes     Connects AUDOUT to pin 11 of RS232 port
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
assignments. The 1000 *may* have similar settings but I cannot guarantee this.
vi. Hol(e)y, Hol(e)y, Hol(e)y
Owners of Rev. 6a A500's will notice that they only have 4 RAM chips as
in between the RAM chips are empty sets of holes which look like something
        Firstly, fear not - the reason you have a quarter the number of RAM
four times as large as the 41256 1-bit x 256K chips used in the 5 and earlier
uses these larger chips because they are slightly cheaper on a dollar-per-
41256, and they will accept up to 2Mb. The new Series II A590's use the 44256
        But, back to those extra holes. They are indeed designed to accept
without having to buy an A501 or other expander (this is particularly useful
1Mb chip-RAM). If you want to install your own RAM there, you should do as
you have a solder-sniffer. Now look at those holes and you will see that they
process covers all exposed copper areas with solder). You must clean this
the other (or blowing the solder through; if you choose this method, make sure
you have cleaned out all the holes, solder in the sockets. Now plug in four
A501 (in Australia, the difference is roughly A$20).
with no problems at all; however, I suspect that Commodore would recommend
chips so that if you ever buy a series II A590, you can shift the chips over

--------------------------------------------
this modification is flaky at best and I cannot recommend it (having tried it
memory to be mapped at $C00000 (the computer would only recognise it if I had
interest to owners of the 1MB Agnus. (This failure to work as $C0 RAM may well
        I will deliberately be vague because this is not a trivial
not have enough knowledge to perform the mod.
chips (for speed information, see the end of subsection vi. above). Bend the
it is well clear of the other pins and easily accessible from the top of the
of the existing RAM, making sure to install them in the same orientation as
so you will have to content yourself with only soldering the corner pins.
convenient take-off point of this signal). You should now have 1Mb of RAM. (If
#32, of the A501 port. I had no success with this). This mod sounds all very
secondhand A501 than to buy 41256 chips. In addition, due to the precarious
room to solder all of the pins down), the mod is sensitive to shock; if you
"possible but ill-advised" modification.
viii. Double Trouble
The hack to accelerate your Amiga to 14MHz has been published in countless
involves removing the original 68000 from your Amiga and substituting a
have "16MHz" stamped on them, but the SGS-Thompson clones do not). The clock
input is connected to the base 28MHz clock. THIS MODIFICATION SHOULD BE
will refuse to load because they use timing-dependent loaders.
down-side to this modification is that some floppy drives will not handle the
the high speed, you can either replace them or run a program called "DFDelay"
swapping df1: for df0: - to do which you will need a Commodore df1:. The
quieter than the new rubbishy things; if you have an A1010, you can be fairly
        To perform the mod, remove your old 68000 and embed it in a perspex
divide-by-2 counter. Connect the input of this to a convenient take-off point
anywhere will do). Now bend out pin 15 of the new CPU and solder a wire to
insulation from one end, and stick this end down pin 15 of the 68000 socket.
wire in the socket. Now wire a SPDT switch as follows :
                                            BACK VIEW
   To output of divide-by-2 counter -+-o |  DOWN=14.28MHz
  To wire in pin 15 of 68000 socket -+-o |

pins, bend the remaining pins out, and stick the chip on top of one of the
off the existing components rather than stringing yet another pair of wires
        If you only have chip and/or slow memory (see subsubsection iv-2.)
CPU-intensive operations; DMA rates will be unchanged). If you have true
normal speed. Try placing a large perpective brush with anti-aliasing HIGH

--------------------

                1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5
              /-------------------------------------------|
         13 -|                                            |- 73
         15 -|                                            |- 71
         17 -|                                            |- 69
         19 -|                                            |- 67
         21 -|                                            |- 65
         23 -|                 TOP  VIEW                  |- 63
         25 -|                                            |- 61
         27 -|                                            |- 59
         29 -|                                            |- 57
         31 -|                                            |- 55
             |____________________________________________|
                3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5

-------------------
and plug the new one straight in. Note that to use the new video modes, you
installing the new Denise, you also eliminate the annoying video glitches

-------------------------
advertise a tasteless soggy mess called Rice Bubbles].
sometimes goes unaccountably blank after being switched on for a while.
badly. It is caused by arcing of the EHT rail (around 14kV, from memory) to
leave it for a couple of days (to allow capacitors to discharge), and then to
        If it does not, however, sterner measures are called for. Open your
hours. If you actively work against Murphy's Law by watching it from behind
eventually be lucky enough to actually catch it in the act of arcing. Mark the
has a very high dielectric constant and hence helps to prevent arcs).
xii. Yo Ho Ho And A Packet Of Disks
I sometimes describe A-Max as the only useful productivity tool for the Amiga;
incomparably better than their Amiga counterparts. However, due to suppression
a piece of dead plant, the future of this marvellous product looks slightly
        There exists a software patch which will allow you to [illegally] run
drive with the A-Max cartridge, you must have ROMs or EPROMs in the ROM
sockets.
NB: The above procedure is wholly illegal and the author is not explicitly
ROMs (purchased before the great ROM drought). The above information is


---------------------
have invested in a 10MHz 286 motherboard with just enough RAM to get started,
ancient XT casing, with an equally ancient 150W power supply. The total cost
(not EISA cards, but then I have no EISA-buss machines anyway !), drives and
and so on, I heartily recommend buying such a system, unless you are game

------------------
80286 rather than the Intel original, the CPU becomes extremely warm, too hot
uses an AMD 80286-16 processor, and after 25 minutes of operation at turbo
This kind of heating is undesirable in that it shortens the chip life and,
shutdown. (The so-called XT-286's, XT-class machines with 80286 processors,
property, you should consider attaching some sort of heatsink to the CPU. An
ineffective for this task.
some reason, the Intel line stays a lot cooler than the AMD line in general.
iii. Sudden Death
Scenario : You are working on an important document under an operating system
to take your ten-minutes-per-hour anti-RSI coffee break. You return (having
Your document is there on the screen, but the program has halted.
subsection ii). It is also sometimes caused by dirty or otherwise imperfect
than 2 years old, it may well be that your sockets are becoming dirty. (An
all of which seemed to fail simultaneously. It turned out that the network
sockets used on the motherboards, and occasionally the fileserver would start
the faulty network card corrupted the transfer. Because of a "feature" in the
for an ID sequence to indicate the machine the corrupted packet was destined
the serviceperson (erm, me) puzzled for quite a few days).
cards, clean the connectors with an ink eraser (pencil erasers are not
can also push down on all the socketed chips to reseat them.
Associates' SCAN (and if necessary CLEAN) programs to detect and kill these.
iv. Overworked FPU's
Due to the large price discrepancy between the different speed ratings of
387 for your 33MHz 386. The chances are good that such an arrangement will in
increased. In simple terms, it will get hot. For this reason, you should
than plastic-bodied devices. And whenever possible, run in non-turbo mode.
v. Hot-Rodding, Across the Universe
It is relatively common knowledge nowadays that it is quite possible to
naturally carries with it the same overheating problems mentioned in
modification, there are a couple of pieces of information you may find useful:
(make sure you know which you need) which is TWICE the frequency you want your
- The crystal to replace is the one rated at TWICE the listed speed of your
led astray by the I/O clock crystal(s) !
the old crystal, so that if you ever have to sell your machine you can pop in
        Note that I have never performed this type of enhancement to 80386
from 12MHz to 16MHz.
vi. Hacked Reset Switches
Most 286/386/486 motherboards (all I have ever seen) come with a reset switch
a number of postings to USENET describing how to add a pushbutton to the
wisdom advise the installation of a pullup resistor "to make sure the line
that when you turn on your machine, you only have a 50/50 chance that the
designers already put in a pullup resistor, so there is absolutely no need to
pin of the CPU and any convenient signal ground.
vii. Tearing Your Hair
Scenario : Your favorite machine, with SoundBlaster, LAN, VGA, Hercules, Voice
start.
display adaptor and the floppy controller (if this is integrated with the hard
adding cards until the machine no longer starts up (assuming it starts up in
by the number of people who leave all their cards in and just poke about with

-------------------
(I have both VGA and Hercules cards in my "useful" machines). However, not all
conflicts). Below is a table of the allowable configurations; a star indicates

                         MDA  .    *    *    *    *
                         EGA  *    *    .    .    .
                         VGA  *    .    .    .    .
For the purposes of display mixing, an MDA (mono 80x25 text only) is identical
VGA card as one of your displays (the most common configuration is VGA + MDA
(If you load up the extended-mode-handler program supplied with most SVGA
the possible pitfall with Hercules cards; most of them contain a parallel
a parallel port mapped at this address, strange errors will crop up. (Also
port is at 3BC, the Herc card will become LPT1: - this may necessitate some
it to an unused port address.
companies have released so-called "color Hercules" cards, which support both
video card.
ix. Expanding SVGA Cards
Many people ask, "Can I expand my SVGA card ?". In most cases, the answer is
RAM. The two examples of this which I have seen are Tseng Laboratories SVGA
(again, mine came with 512K, but had sockets for the extra RAM). In such
requisite RAM chips (usually 44256; however, some older cards will use 4464
you spend the money on this, however, consider - do you really need the extra
you to use ONE extra mode, viz. 1024x768x256. This mode is not really useful
you will understand why !). Also, on monitors coarser than 0.28" dot pitch,
displayed properly (the edges of the screen are compressed). Although my
resolution (except when viewing very large GIFs, eg the 1152x900 pictures
        A final note : I have yet to see a card which was supplied with 256K
older (true VGA) chipsets incompatible with the newer de facto video

---------------------------
the best BIOS should be an original IBM chip; however, since most software is
I haven't seen anything more recent than an original 5-slot PC, although I do
with a "real" BIOS is not necessarily more compatible than a clone. So the
386 BIOSs, and Award 386 BIOS, and I have used Phoenix 286 and Award 286 BIOS.
it seems a lot more sensibly designed than the Award or Phoenix programs. For
chipset parameters related to memory speed and setup, whilst the Award only
the XCMOS settings and have managed to make your computer non-functional, if
button, and the XCMOS settings will be set to default values, unlocking your
no mono monitor, and I accidentally set the display type to "MONO", meaning
order to get the machine usable again I had to open it and unplug the Hercules
especially since the machine in question was the bottom (Murphy again !) in a
        NB: Since the BIOS is resident on a standard EPROM, it is quite
type. However, the astute will notice that there are *two* chips in the
controller. I have never had occasion to try pirating BIOSs, but I doubt that
another, because when you boot a slow AMI machine, you see a serial number of
then another digit indicating the keyboard controller version.
                         -=<* General Information *>=-
i. Desoldering Small IC's (Less than 40 pins)
Small chips can be fairly easily desoldered by inserting a suitable lever
the rows of pins. When one end is substantially further out than the other,

--------------------------------------------
strongly recommend the use of an IC desoldering tool. If this is unavailable,
"wet" the joints with a plentiful amount of fresh solder.
iii. Desoldering Surface-Mounting Resistors and Capacitors
Unfortunately, one really needs to apply heat to both ends of these components
solder-sniffer to remove most of the solder, then heat up the entire component
sure you have the correct value of replacement component; SM resistors and

------------------------------------------
has a chip like this which is damaged, replace the motherboard; it will
Japan. Not to mention the hours you will waste soldering all those .025" pitch
        (Note : For those who do not believe 160-pin IC's exist, please refer
160-pin surface-mounting ULA).
v. Old PCB's
Printed circuit boards which have been in service for a while are MUCH more
more recent boards. In the case of plated-thru-hole double-sided boards
board when desoldering components. This necessitates much laborious flying
device made in late 1979 (an old glass tty, in fact), and I would strongly
